# Masai Giraffe (_Giraffa camelopardalis tippelskirchi_)
## Members: 
Dariya Edwards: (dariya.edwards001@umb.edu)
Iman Hassan: (iman.hassan001@umb.edu)
Amanda Burke: (amanda.burke004@umb.edu)
Hisen Teker: (hisen.teker001@umb.edu)
Jeffanie Monteiro: (jeffanie.monteiro001@umb.edu)
Judith Doane: (judith.doane001@umb.edu)
Kate Levine: (kate.levine002@umb.edu)
Kenzie DeMeo: (kenzie.demeo001@umb.edu)
Temitope Odedele: (temitope.odedele001@umb.edu)
Crystal Valente: (crystal.valente001@umb.edu)

### Introduction:
_Giraffa camelopardalis tippelskirchi_, commonly known as the Masai giraffe, is the largest subspecies of giraffes, and among the tallest quadruped animals in the world. These endangered herbivores have been in captivity for many years, as we readily see them in our sanctuaries and zoos. They exhibit unnatural and non-beneficial physical behaviors across these differing captive environments. One major observed action in these captured animals is associated with oral activities, such as stereotypic licking, which is not seen in their respective wild counterparts. Stereotypic licking can be defined as a recurring motion focused on non-food related objects. The manifestation of these repetitive and addictive behaviors remains inconclusive. Research studies have begun to explore what allures the captive Masai giraffe to adopt these actions. Previous studies have indicated that certain aversive stimuli fail to alter this conduct. Other studies have explored how controlling, introducing, or reducing foraging encouragements, nutritional modifications, and human interaction impact a captive Masai giraffe’s physical performances. However, the scope of these studies is limited. Typically, the studies are focused on Masai giraffes in only a few enclosures; they are too narrow to draw any definitive conclusions.  There is still much to consider regarding this observed behavior in captive Masai giraffes. While what universally creates these behaviors remains unresolved, the purpose of this study is to try and gain insight into how captivity can greatly impact this animal’s natural instincts and cause them to lose their instinctual disposition, leading them to adopt odd behaviors as a result.


#### Article 1: “Failure of a chemical spray to significantly reduce stereotypic licking in a captive giraffe” 
	
In the article “Failure of a chemical spray to significantly reduce stereotypic licking in a captive giraffe”, researchers hypothesized that applying a bitter chemical to the areas of the fence most licked by the giraffe would reduce stereotypic licking behaviors. There was no specific control group mentioned in the study, however the giraffe’s baseline data was utilized to compare the frequency of licking before and after application of the bitter chemical. Potential critiques of the study include the small sample size of one giraffe and the use of only one aversive stimulus for deterrence. The results of the study showed that the underlying motivation driving the behavior was unaffected by the aversive stimulus, therefore the hypothesis was not supported. A hypothesis that could build on top of the research presented in this study is to investigate the effectiveness of other types of taste deterrents or other methods of reducing stereotypic licking in giraffes. 

Tarou, L. R., Bashaw, M. J., & Maple, T. L. (2003). Failure of a chemical spray to significantly reduce stereotypic licking in a captive giraffe. _Zoo Biology, 22_(6), 601–607. https://doi.org/10.1002/zoo.10114

#### Article 2: “The effects of increased hay-to-grain ratio on behavior, metabolic health measures, and fecal bacterial communities in four Masai giraffe at Cleveland Metroparks Zoo”

In the article “The effects of increased hay-to-grain ratio on behavior, metabolic health measures, and fecal bacterial communities in four Masai giraffe at Cleveland Metroparks Zoo”, researchers hypothesized that a higher hay-to-grain ratio and increased time spent feeding would maintain or increase the serum Ca2+:P-, decrease serum insulin-to-glucose ratios, maintain leptin levels (as a measure of body condition), and significantly alter fecal bacterial communities. The giraffes’ condition at baseline served as the control for the purposes of this study. Potential critiques of this study include the small sample size of four giraffes and limited evaluation of nutrient analysis, due to its production by a manufacturer rather than analysis of what was fed. A hypothesis that could build on top of the research presented in this study is examining the long-term health and welfare benefits of forage-based diets in Masai giraffes housed in captivity.

Monson, M. L., Dennis, P. M., Lukas, K. E., Krynak, K. L., Carrino-Kyker, S. R., Burke, D. J., & Schook, M. W. (2018). The effects of increased hay-to-grain ratio on behavior, metabolic health measures, and fecal bacterial communities in four Masai giraffe (Giraffa camelopardalis tippelskirchi)at Cleveland Metroparks Zoo. _Zoo Biology, 37_(5), 320–331. https://doi.org/10.1002/zoo.21434

#### Article 3: “Effects of Guest Feeding Programs on Captive Giraffe Behavior” 
	
In the article “Effects of guest feeding programs on captive giraffe behavior”, researchers aimed to assess the impacts of guest feeding programs on captive giraffe behavior and welfare, as well as identify any potential management strategies that may mitigate any negative consequences. They did this by comparing the time budgets of giraffes in zoos with and without guest feeding programs, the zoos without guest feeding programs can be considered as the control group in this study. The dependent variables of the study are the time budgets of giraffes, including both normal and stereotypic behaviors, in relation to the independent variable of participation in guest feeding programs. Some critiques of this study include its limited duration of only one summer, and its limit of nine zoo locations, since results may not be a true representation of giraffe behavior throughout the year or in different environmental conditions and locations. A hypothesis that could build on top of the research presented in this study is that modifying the timing or frequency of guest feeding programs, to smaller and more frequent feedings, will reduce idleness and other associated negative outcomes associated with these programs in Masai giraffes.  

Orban, D. A., Siegford, J. M., & Snider, R. J. (2016). Effects of guest feeding programs on captive giraffe behavior. _Zoo Biology, 35_(2), 157–166. https://doi.org/10.1002/zoo.21275

#### Article 4: A survey assessment of variables related to stereotypy in captive giraffe and okapi

In the article “A survey assessment of variables related to stereotypy in captive giraffe and okapi”, researchers hypothesized that if giraffes and okapi are monitored in captivity, they will have stereotypical behaviors. As a control, researchers used other research on giraffes that displayed stereotypical behavior such as licking. This baseline data helped them compare the results that they found to prove the hypothesis true. The independent variables in this study were the number of hours the individuals spent indoors, access at night to conspecifics, feeding frequency, method of feeding, and type of food provided were predictors of stereotypic licking. Subspecies, birth history, size of the indoor enclosure, environmental change, and type of food provided were found to be significant predictors of stereotypic pacing. A potential critique that I have for this study is the observation of two different animals simultaneously. This study focused on giraffes and okapi and I think it would have been more effective if they chose one species to study. According to the results, many more giraffes were studied than okapi so I think they should have just focused on one. Due to references of gender differences amongst the giraffes, another potential hypothesis that we can make is that if female giraffes are put into stressful situations, they will perform stereotypical behaviors such as licking or pacing.

Bashaw, M. J., Tarou, L. R., Maki, T. S., & Maple, T. L. (2001). A survey assessment of variables related to stereotypy in captive giraffe and okapi. _Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 73_(3), 235–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0168-1591(01)00137-x

#### Article 5: Tongue twisters: feeding enrichment to reduce oral stereotypy in giraffe

In the article “Tongue twisters: feeding enrichment to reduce oral stereotypy in giraffe”, researchers hypothesized that if giraffes are encouraged to engage in more realistic foraging behavior, then oral stereotypy can be reduced in herbivores. This study was conducted and tested at a zoo in Atlanta, Georgia in both holding and exhibit areas. The data was collected using instantaneous scan sampling of the giraffes’ interactions with the complex feeder and its behavior after. In this study, it was found that the most prevalent stereotypical behavior in giraffes is licking of non food objects. The independent variable was the complex feeder, which allowed the giraffe to use more tongue movement to eat, rather than using licking as a sign of boredom or stereotype. A potential critique that I have for this study is to have and observe a control group in the same situations so that it is easier and more effective to compare data. One hypothesis that could be used to continue research is that if giraffes are fed strictly outdoors, the stereotypical behaviors will decrease.

Fernandez, L. T., Bashaw, M. J., Sartor, R. L., Bouwens, N. R., & Maki, T. S. (2008). Tongue twisters: feeding enrichment to reduce oral stereotypy in giraffe. _Zoo Biology, 27_(3), 200–212. https://doi.org/10.1002/zoo.20180



#### Research Design:
We will be conducting a true experiment to test our hypothesis. The Masai giraffes inhabit an enclosure that, despite scientists’ best efforts, fails to perfectly replicate the Kenyan landscape, their natural habitat; it also inherently prevents their ability to freely roam. As a result of living in a zoo enclosure, they no longer need to engage in certain instinctive activities, such as searching for quality vegetation and fruits, as their required sustenance is provided by zoo staff. We believe this unnatural setting may cause these captive giraffes to engage in unnatural behaviors, such as licking a metal pole–a behavior that they have likely learned in confinement. We hypothesize that bringing these giraffes back to their natural environment will restore natural behaviors (that is, not licking or licking the metal pole less). To test our hypothesis, we will randomly select 10 Masai giraffes and send them back to Kenya, while leaving 10 giraffes in the Massachusetts zoo enclosure. The control group consists of giraffes who are left in captivity. The experimental group consists of those who are flown back. They will have a metal pole installed in their new, natural setting. To create a positive control group, we will randomly select 5 of the giraffes remaining in the enclosure and place them in a separate section of the giraffe enclosure; this area will be fenced off by a wooden fence as well as the natural foliage of the enclosure so that there is no mixing of groups. These giraffes will be given new enrichment toys like hanging feeding balls and puzzle feeders; we will also place a metal pole in this part of the enclosure and observe their behavior remotely. The negative control group will be the remaining 5 drive giraffes with no stimulating modifications made to their environment.The independent variable is the change in the giraffes’ living conditions, particularly the difference between the living conditions of the giraffes who remain in the zoo enclosure and those who will now live in their original Kenyan habitat. The behavior exhibited by the giraffes towards the metal poles–as expressed by how often the metal pole is licked–is the dependent variable. The giraffes will be tagged to allow for tracking, and they will be remotely monitored over the course of a year. The number of licks will be recorded daily using DeepLabCut. We will subsequently compare the data compiled from all sets of giraffes to determine if the data supported our hypothesis. Our null hypothesis predicts that there will be no difference in the giraffes’ behavior as it relates to the metal poles, despite the changes in living conditions. Several confounding variables include contamination and novelty effects. Contamination can occur if a new enrichment toy somehow enters the section of the enclosure containing the control group. Novelty effects can occur if the giraffes now living in Kenya change their behavior towards the metal pole due to extemporaneous factors; they may change their behavior based on new access to certain types of vegetation or wildlife. We expect the control group to lick the metal pole the most. We expect the experimental group to lick the metal pole the least, and we predict that the positive control group will lick the metal pole more than the experimental group but less than the control group.

#### Ethical Considerations:
There are considerable ethical issues that arise when designing a research-based experiment that centers around releasing captive Masai giraffes into their species’ natural environment. Inevitably, multiple biases present themselves within the experiment.  The strongest initial biases are that stereotypic licking will be eliminated in the wild, the giraffe will be able to return to its naturalistic behaviors based on an environment that invokes those behaviors. Both of these would ultimately allow the Masai giraffe to regain the necessary stimulation its species is built upon. The benefits of captivity manifest themselves in the erasure of any potential possibility that the giraffe will encounter a lack of substantive food sources in wildlife scenarios. Captivity provides safety for the giraffe that its wildlife counterparts do not possess in natural environments–both threats from predators and environmental exposure infiltrate their ability for survival. There are numerous ethical and logistical risks when conducting an experiment of this variety. Multiple stressors on the animal emerge in the forms of transportation, alienation, and threats from predators and poachers. The potential of disease, disrupting Kenyan ecosystems, and also separation from the giraffes’ formerly acclimated atmosphere heighten the ethical dilemmas within the experiment. Another factor that is essential to consider in the facilitation of this experiment is the role of the researchers throughout every step of the process. Financial burdens on conservationists and other researchers, the taxing physical demands of transporting the animals–including the upkeep of hygienic conditions–and the general jeopardization of wellbeing in wildlife spaces all contribute to the humanistic ethical risks. Overall, it is crucial to emphasize that the integrity of the entire experiment is contingent upon the survival of all ten of the giraffes–despite all of these obstacles. 

